Documentation for the Docker Compose Application Update Module (#2134)
mendersoftware/mender-docs: 06.Artifact-creation/03.Containerized-application-updates/docs.md

---
title: Container Updates
taxonomy:
    category: docs
    label: tutorial
---

Mender maintains and support update modules for managing containerized workloads

> on the edge devices. The Application Update Module extends the update module API

Reviewer: What's an Application Update Module?
The fact that Docker compose is based on it doesn't tell me much about the Application Update module.

Reviewer: Needs a chapter with a definition of an Application Update module.

to easily support different kinds of container orchestrator. Currently the module
supports Docker Compose orchestrator.

## Docker Compose

In this section we will show you how to use the Docker Compose Application
Update Module for deploying a simple Docker composition on your device.

> #### Prepare the device

Reviewer 2: ### WIP - CE Docs review

We could be more verbose regarding which device, from instructions I got 2 devices involved, the actual remote device and another one for the artifact generation. This is important as the requirements for each are different, i.e the one in charge for artifact generation is not required to have mender installed.

Before installing the Update Module, you need to ensure that the following
dependencies are installed on the device:
 * [Mender client](../../03.Client-installation/02.Install-with-Debian-package) (version >= 3.0)
 * [Docker Engine](https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/?target=_blank)
 * [Docker Compose](https://docs.docker.com/compose/install/?target=_blank) (version >= 2.0)

>  * [xdelta3](https://github.com/jmacd/xdelta)

Reviewer 3: A little bit curious on how the following commands are going to work if we have a read only rootfs. Should we state you must have a RW rootfs before proceeding if you made it "delta ready" in the past?

Reviewer: Doesn't sound actionable - pls think in terms of making a PR with improvements you have to suggest instead of open question.

So instead of `Should we state you must have a RW rootfs before proceeding if you made it "delta ready" in the past?` more like `I tested the on a RW file system - didn't work - here is a suggestion for how the docs should address this`.

   * Only required if using binary deltas

> [ui-accordion independent=true open=none]

Reviewer: This looks nice, but not obvious from the rendering it was a button.
Would just keep it expanded.

Vefify -> Verify

Reviewer: Deleting, Lucho commented as well.

> [ui-accordion independent=true open=none]

Reviewer: This looks nice, but not obvious from the rendering it was a button.
Would just keep it expanded.

Vefify -> Verify

> [ui-accordion-item title="Vefify device dependencies"]

Reviewer 3: Small typo in Verify

> To quickly verify the required dependencies are installed on your device, run
> the following:
>
> ```bash
> mender --version
> docker --version
> docker compose version
> ```

[/ui-accordion-item]
[/ui-accordion]

> To install the Docker Compose update module, run the following commands on your

Reviewer 3: `Update Module` in uppercase for consistency

Reviewer: Let's do a check for that on the whole document.

device:
<!--FIXME(AUTOVERSION): "app-update-module/%/"/app-update-module-->
```bash
# Install Application Update Module
mkdir -p /usr/share/mender/modules/v3
wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/mendersoftware/app-update-module/master/src/app \
        -O /usr/share/mender/modules/v3/app \
        && chmod +x /usr/share/mender/modules/v3/app
# Install Docker Compose module
mkdir -p /usr/share/mender/app-modules/v1
wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/mendersoftware/app-update-module/master/src/app-modules/docker-compose \
        -O /usr/share/mender/app-modules/v1/docker-compose \
        && chmod +x /usr/share/mender/app-modules/v1/docker-compose
# Install the Configuration files
wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/mendersoftware/app-update-module/master/conf/mender-app.conf \
        -O /etc/mender/mender-app.conf
wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/mendersoftware/app-update-module/master/conf/mender-app-docker-compose.conf \
        -O /etc/mender/mender-app-docker-compose.conf
```

> !!! Inspect the configuration files on your device `/etc/mender/mender-app.conf` and

Reviewer: Based on what do I know how to configure it?

Reviewer: Section on configuration of the both the Application Update and Container Update Module needed

Author: This was a bit confusing to me too. It should work out of the box, so I'm considering to remove this tip.

!!! `/etc/mender/mender-app-docker-compose.conf` to customize the update module.

#### Prepare the deployment
Before you can deploy Docker compositions to your devices, you need to install
the Application Update Artifact Generator. Make sure you have
[`mender-artifact`](../../10.Downloads#mender-artifact) installed on your system and then install the

> Application Update Artifact Generator:

Reviewer 2: ### WIP - CE Docs review
Maybe not strictly limited to this doc entry but `app-gen `seems to fail in my environment (tried bash & zsh), apparently the line 78 needs a change:
```bash
...
while [ $# -ge 1 ] && [ -n "$1" ]; do
...
```
After that, I was able to use the script. ([ref](https://unix.stackexchange.com/a/463038))

Reviewer: This snippet is just downloading the app?
Did you mean: https://github.com/mendersoftware/mender-docs/pull/2134/files#r1232398222

Reviewer 3: Then I would create the PR for https://github.com/mendersoftware/app-update-module/blob/ee12ba4c869f733af86b74469ead20edaa605866/gen/app-gen#L78 instead

Reviewer: Closing this as Lucho confirmed this is the error I reported and will continue there as it points to the snippet where the error gets triggered.

Author: https://github.com/mendersoftware/app-update-module/pull/32

```bash
BINDIR=$HOME/bin
mkdir -p $BINDIR
export PATH=$BINDIR:$PATH

> wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/mendersoftware/app-update-module/master/gen/app-gen \

Reviewer 3: This script contains hashes like: 

docker.io/library/debian:11,docker.io/library/debian:latest@sha256:a94cd7c7d58f483affd5937853ad4d24caa18cd7c2ec9ef65a9e528dfbc5eb07

Should we worry about it?

        -O $BINDIR/app-gen
chmod +x $BINDIR/app-gen
```

#### Create the Mender artifact

As an example, we will use a simple multi-container composition with a Traefik
gateway and a simple server. Begin by creating the manifest and saving it in a
separate directory:
```bash
mkdir -p manifests/v1
cat <<EOF > manifests/v1/docker-compose.yaml
version: "3.3"
services:
  gateway:
    image: "traefik:v2.9"
    command:
      - "--providers.docker=true"
      - "--providers.docker.exposedbydefault=false"
      - "--entrypoints.web.address=:80"
    ports:
      - "8080:80"
    volumes:
      - "/var/run/docker.sock:/var/run/docker.sock:ro"
  whoami:
    image: "traefik/whoami"
    labels:
      - "traefik.enable=true"
      - "traefik.http.routers.whoami.rule=Path(\`/whoami\`)"
      - "traefik.http.routers.whoami.entrypoints=web"
EOF
```

To generate the artifact, we need to know the target platform of the devices we
want to deploy to. In the following example, we will assume the platform we are

> deploying to is `linux/arm/v7`.

Reviewer: Why do we need to know that?
How do I figure out what mine is if I don't know?

Reviewer 3: I would assume a person who follows this know about the platform, my concern is the expected format `x/x/x`. Are we documenting it somewhere else?

Reviewer: Not actionable, open ended question.

Add part explaining how to get the value for the platform (`linux/arm/v7`).

```bash
ARTIFACT_NAME="myfirstcomposition"
DEVICE_TYPE="raspberrypi4"
PLATFORM="linux/arm/v7"

> app-gen --artifact-name "$ARTIFACT_NAME" \

Reviewer: Gave me an error:
```
/home/alan-nt/bin/app-gen: line 78: $1: unbound variable
```

Reviewer: Ref to closed conversation: https://github.com/mendersoftware/mender-docs/pull/2134/files#r1232426335

Reviewer: Seems like there are [code dependencies](https://github.com/mendersoftware/mender-docs/pull/2134#issuecomment-1591491346) to be able to verify these docs.
The docs can't be merged until we can successfully execute the snippets.

Author: https://github.com/mendersoftware/app-update-module/pull/32

        --platform "$PLATFORM" \
        --application-name "$ARTIFACT_NAME" \
        --image docker.io/library/traefik:v2.9 \
        --image docker.io/traefik/whoami:latest \
        --orchestrator docker-compose \
        --manifests-dir ./manifests/v1 \
        --output-path artifact.mender \
        -- \
        --software-name="$ARTIFACT_NAME" \
        --software-version="v1"
```

!!!!! All arguments after `--` are passed directly to `mender-artifact write
!!!!! module-image`. In the following example we will make use of [versioning
!!!!! constraints](../09.Software-versioning#application-updates-update-modules) to
!!!!! prevent deploying the wrong version to a device.

The generated artifact is now ready to be deployed on the device. Open your
browser and navigate to the "Releases" column in [Hosted Mender
UI](https://hosted.mender.io/ui/releases) and upload your newly created
artifact. Once uploaded, navigate to the "Devices" column and select your device
and then click `Create a deployment for this device` in the `Device actions` in
the bottom right corner. Select your newly created artifact and click `CREATE
DEPLOYMENT`.

##### Verify your deployment

> Once deployed, the device will start serving a simple server on port 8080. You

Author: I'm failing to reproduce these errors that you report. I did, however, encounter an issue with missing `jq`, so I'll add that to the docs. Could you try again? Maybe the `app-update-module` sources was outdated when you last tested it.

> Once deployed, the device will start serving a simple server on port 8080. You

Reviewer 2: Indeed Alf, I retested and now works as expected, thank you very much for your work ⚡

can test the application by sending a request to path `/whoami` and the server
will echo the request.
To this end, we will leverage the Troubleshoot add-on and start a port-forward
session using the [mender-cli](TODO).
```bash

> mender-cli port-forward 1bfcf943-4378-4a4f-bc88-0b4c86cdcc74 8080:8080

Reviewer 3: We should not assume the customer knows that the `id` here means the `device id`. To make sure that visit the reference to https://docs.mender.io/add-ons/port-forward#port-forwarding would be a must and state the following line is an example. Or just change it for `mender-cli port-forward device_id 8080:8080`

Reviewer: Pls translate into real change suggestion.

Reviewer 3: Change for `mender-cli port-forward device_id 8080:8080`  or state the id above must be replaced with your actual id

    volumes:
      - "/var/run/docker.sock:/var/run/docker.sock:ro"
  whoami:
    image: "traefik/whoami"
    labels:
      - "traefik.enable=true"
      - "traefik.http.routers.whoami.rule=Path(\`/whoami\`)"
      - "traefik.http.routers.whoami.entrypoints=web"
EOF
```

Since we are only upgrading the Traefik service, we do not need to include the
image for the `whoami` service since this was provided by the last deployment.
And, to save bandwidth we will create a binary delta of the image for the
gateway service.

```bash
app-gen --artifact-name "${ARTIFACT_NAME}-v2" \
        --device-type "$DEVICE_TYPE" \
        --platform "$PLATFORM" \
        --application-name "$ARTIFACT_NAME" \
        --image docker.io/library/traefik:v2.9,docker.io/library/traefik:v2.10 \
        --orchestrator docker-compose \
        --manifests-dir ./manifests/v2 \
        --output-path artifact-v2.mender \
        --deep-delta \
        -- \
        --software-name "${ARTIFACT_NAME}" \
        --software-version "v2" \
        --depends "rootfs-image.${ARTIFACT_NAME}.version:v1"
```

!!!!! The last argument to `app-gen` ensures that the artifact is only
!!!!! installed if `v1` is installed.

> The `--deep-delta` flag enables the delta feature which creates a binary delta

Reviewer: Missing documentation about Application Update Module.
Mentioned that already in anohter commetn.
Resolving.

---
title: Container Updates
taxonomy:
    category: docs
    label: tutorial
---

> Mender maintains and support Update Modules for managing containerized workloads
> on the edge devices. *Application Update Module*, being the regular [Mender Update Module](../08.Create-a-custom-Update-Module),
> contains and implements all the logic behind the deployment of any containerized
> application to a device. The *Application Update Module* extends the Update Module API
> to easily support different kinds of container orchestrators. Currently the module
> supports Docker Compose orchestrator.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

We want to present the docker componse use case.
Don't care about the Application Update Module which is just a means to an end.

Author: Removed the first paragraph and the first heading.

> ## Docker Compose

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

!!! the following:
!!! ```bash
!!! mender --version
!!! docker --version
!!! docker compose version
!!! xdelta3 -V
!!! ```

To install the Docker Compose Update Module, run the following commands on your
devices:
<!--AUTOVERSION: "app-update-module/%/"/ignore-->
```bash
# Install Application Update Module
mkdir -p /usr/share/mender/modules/v3
wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/mendersoftware/app-update-module/master/src/app \
        -O /usr/share/mender/modules/v3/app \
        && chmod +x /usr/share/mender/modules/v3/app
# Install Docker Compose module
mkdir -p /usr/share/mender/app-modules/v1
wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/mendersoftware/app-update-module/master/src/app-modules/docker-compose \
        -O /usr/share/mender/app-modules/v1/docker-compose \
        && chmod +x /usr/share/mender/app-modules/v1/docker-compose
# Install the Configuration files
wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/mendersoftware/app-update-module/master/conf/mender-app.conf \
        -O /etc/mender/mender-app.conf
wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/mendersoftware/app-update-module/master/conf/mender-app-docker-compose.conf \
        -O /etc/mender/mender-app-docker-compose.conf
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
!!! [Application Update Module](https://github.com/mendersoftware/app-update-module/blob/master/docs/README-submodule-api.md#applications-updates) contains the generalized logic for application updates. It is a dependency for the Docker Compose Application Update Module, that is why it's being installed.
```

---
title: Container Updates
taxonomy:
    category: docs
    label: tutorial
---

In this section we will show you how to use the Docker Compose Application
Update Module for deploying a simple Docker composition on your device.

### Prerequesites

> To get started using the Docker Compose Update Module, we need to prepare the
> target devices for deployment and as the workstation for creating the
> deployment. We will start with the devices before returning to the workstation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To get started using the Docker Compose Update Module, we need to prepare the
target devices for accepting the deployment and the workstation for creating the
deployment.```

---

Mender maintains and support update modules for managing containerized workloads

> on the edge devices. *Application Update Module* (App Update Module), being the regular [Mender Update Module](../08.Create-a-custom-Update-Module),

Author: In the first iteration, we want to receive feedback from customers that have shown interest in an Docker Compose update module. I believe once we have more material it makes sense to split this into a top-level chapter. For now, I believe this is too targeted to stay at the the top level.

> on the edge devices. *Application Update Module* (App Update Module), being the regular [Mender Update Module](../08.Create-a-custom-Update-Module),

Reviewer 2: Excellent then, we (CEs) completed the review for this Docs entry, kind regards

In this section we will show you how to use the Docker Compose Application
Update Module for deploying a simple Docker composition on your device.

### Prerequesites

To get started using the Docker Compose Update Module, we need to prepare the
target devices for deployment and as the workstation for creating the
deployment. We will start with the devices before returning to the workstation.

##### Prepare the devices
Before installing the Update Module on the **target device**, you need to ensure that the following
dependencies are installed on the device:
 * [Mender client](../../03.Client-installation/02.Install-with-Debian-package) (version >= 3.0)
 * [Docker Engine](https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/?target=_blank)
 * [Docker Compose](https://docs.docker.com/compose/install/?target=_blank) (version >= 2.0)
 * [xdelta3](https://github.com/jmacd/xdelta)

>    * *Only required if using binary deltas*

Reviewer: This was in @estape11 PR whihc was merged.
